Raft snapshots RFC (#3662)
redpanda-data/redpanda: docs/rfcs/20220131_raft_snapshots.md

- Feature Name: Raft snapshots
- Status: draft
- Start Date: 2022-01-31
- Authors: Denis Rystsov
- Issue: TBD

# Executive Summary

Introduce Raft snapshots not bound to log truncation to solve compaction related problems with idempotency, transactions, offset translator and pave a way to custom state machines.

## What is being proposed

> 

Reviewer: Question, when compaction is performed, why can't replicas just apply the compaction themselves? Why shouldn't the same results be observed everywhere?

Author: Not really, a follower may be isolated from the cluster for a while and all the other nodes may already did the compaction so that when the node rejoins the cluster it already pulls the log with the holes. Another case when it happens is the reconfiguration when we move the partition from nodes `a,b,c` to nodes `d,e,f` in this case the newer nodes never saw the original data, only already compacted or truncated.

> Make the snapshot before the compaction and ship it to all (majority) nodes in a cluster so that each node sees the same aggregate of the log. Currently when Redpanda does compaction it introduces holes to the log and when a follower replay the log to build an aggregate it end up with different view.

Reviewer: Can you explain why these holes were a solution in the first place? Is it because each batch can have a different compaction timeout interval?

Author: I'd say not batch but a node. Each node does a compaction of its own so there maybe difference between the logs on different nodes but even if the compaction is coordinated it doesn't protect from the cases when we need to add a new node which never saw the original non compacted data.

# Motivation
## Why are we doing this?

To fix existing problems which prevents transacitons from working with the compacted topics. To introduce infastructure to support custom (probably WASM based) state machines.

## What use cases does it support?

 - Idempotency
 - Transactions
 - Offset translator
 - Custom state machines

# Guide-level explanation
## Context

Some of the Redpanda operations require knowledge about all records passed through the partition (Raft log) up to this moment (let's call them aggregate-dependent).
 
 - Idempotency: Redpanda inspects the messages to update the list of ongoing sessions and then uses it to reject the out of order requests.
 - Offset translator: Redpanda tracks the reconfiguration batches to adjust raft offsets into Kafka offsets.
 - Transactions: Redpanda inspects the records to keep an eye on the ongoing transactions and maintain the right consistency level
 
At the same time disks have limited capacity and data eventually lose actuality so Redpanda supports several cleanup policies:
 
 - Deletion
 - Compaction
 

> Deletion clean up policy removes some messages (defined by age or size) from the head of the log.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The deletion clean up policy removes some messages (defined by age or size) from the head of the log.
```

![](./imgs/20220131_log.png)

> Compact clean up policy is a bit more complicated: each record in Redpanda has a key and with compaction enabled Redpanda keeps a record at the tail of the log but removes some or all records with the same key written before it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The compaction clean up policy is a bit more complicated. Each record in Redpanda has a key and when compaction is enabled, Redpanda keeps a record at the tail of the log, but removes some or all of the records with the same key written before it.
```

## Problem

> There is a problem with the integration of aggregate-dependent operations and the cleanup policies: Redpanda may remove data before the operation sees it (it's especially true during reconfiguration because the new node never saw a non compacted log).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a problem with the integration of aggregate-dependent operations and the cleanup policies: Redpanda may remove data before the operation sees it. This is especially possible during reconfiguration because the new node has never seen a non-compacted log).
```

![](./imgs/20220131_cleanup.png)

> Imagine that Redpanda stones withdraw & deposit history for a set of accounts and an aggregate-dependent operation needs an account balance.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
For example, imagine that Redpanda stores withdraw and deposit history for a set of accounts and an aggregate-dependent operation needs an account balance.
```

![](./imgs/20220131_compaction.png)

> We see that the state after compaction is completely different: `(2,-2,4)` vs `(3,1,4)`. The only way to guarantee the correct result is to cache state before the compaction / deletion.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We see that the state after compaction is completely different: `(2,-2,4)` vs `(3,1,4)`. The only way to guarantee the correct result is to cache the state before the compaction / deletion.
```

> Local caching isn't enough. Raft tolerates note failures as long as majority is connected meaning a single node may fall behind the majority and behind the compaction horizon.

Reviewer: `
```suggestion
Local caching isn't enough. Raft tolerates node failures as long as majority is connected meaning a single node may fall behind the majority and behind the compaction horizon.
```

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Local caching isn't enough. Raft tolerates node failures as long as the majority are connected. This means a single node may fall behind the majority and behind the compaction horizon.
```

![](./imgs/20220131_behind.png)

> When the isolated node rejoins the cluster it fetches an already compacted log with holes and the state diverges.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When the isolated node rejoins the cluster it fetches an already-compacted log with holes, and the state diverges.
```

# Reference-level explanation

## Approach #1: Ship the snapshot (cached state) via the log

> The main idea is to use existing log replication to ship the snapshot. It's easier to implement but just like the reconfiguration batches it shifts the offsets and makes us continue to rely on offset translation.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The main idea is to use existing log replication to ship the snapshot. It's easier to implement, but just like the reconfiguration batches, it shifts the offsets and requires that we continue to rely on offset translation.
```

### Overview

> A leader decides to do compaction at offset X:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a leader decides to do compaction at offset X, it:
```

>   1. saves current snapshot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. saves the current snapshot
```

  2. waits until it's safe to do compaction:
    a. segment containing X is closed

>     b. tx front is passed the end of the segment

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure what this means

Author: `a` and `b` are conditions which should be met to perform compaction safely.

Segment is a collection of records, each record has an offset, before Redpanda performs a compaction it should wait until a record collection containing a record with offset X is filled then we close it and start another collection.

Each transactions has a start offset, tx front is a set of start offsets of all ongoing transacitons. Tx front is passed the end of the segment means that all start offsets of the ongoing transactions are greater the the last offset of the segment.

Reviewer 3: You can change /passed/past/ here. Also we don't define tx front here, so maybe expand it:

> All ofsets in set of in-flight transactions, `tx front`, are past the end of the segment.

>   3. replicates snapshot

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  3. replicates the snapshot
```

> A leader or a follower sees the snapshot via `state_machine::apply` (it happens only when the batch is replicated to the majority and can't be lost):
> 
>   - perform the compaction when current node is the leader and it sent the snapshot (within current term)
>   - when the snapshot isn't applied:
>     1. rewind log at offset X
>     2. apply the snapshot
>   - when the snapshot is applied:
>     - perform the compaction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a leader or a follower sees the snapshot via `state_machine::apply` (this only happens when the batch is replicated to the majority and can't be lost), it:

  - performs the compaction when the current node is the leader and it sent the snapshot (within the current term)
  - when the snapshot isn't applied:
    1. rewinds log at offset X
    2. applies the snapshot
  - when the snapshot is applied:
    - performs the compaction
```

> There is a problem with this approach: a follower doesn't know if the batches it replays contain holes so its current state may be incorrect until it sees the snapshot batch. This problem becomes actual when Redpanda supports reads from replicas. There are several ways to deal with it.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
There is a problem with this approach: a follower doesn't know if the batches it replays contain holes, so its current state may be incorrect until it sees the snapshot batch. This becomes a problem when Redpanda supports reads from replicas. There are several ways to handle this: 
```

> #### Blocking replica reads
> 
> A follower is allowed to serve reads only up to the last observed snapshot. Even when the prior batches contain holes they become visible when the snapshot is applied and corrected.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
#### Block replica reads

A follower is allowed to serve reads only up to the last observed snapshot. Even when the prior batches contain holes, they become visible when the snapshot is applied and corrected.
```

#### Modify the `append_entries_request`

> We may modify the append_enties_request to include an offset of the last compaction. When a follower sees that last compaction less than current offset it knows that the latest batches don't have holes and it's safe to serve the requests.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can modify the `append_enties_request` to include an offset of the last compaction. When a follower sees that last compaction is less than the current offset, it knows that the latest batches don't have holes and it's safe to serve the requests.
```

> When we modify `append_entries_request` or introduce and switch to the new API we need to thing of the update story. In order to avoid shutting down a cluster for the update we need to put the change behind a feature flag, update the brokers one by one and only then to active the feature.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When we modify `append_entries_request` or when we introduce and switch to the new API, we need to take upgrades into account. In order to avoid shutting down a cluster for an update, we need to put the change behind a feature flag, update the brokers one by one, and only then active the feature.
```

## Approach #2: Ship the snapshot (cached state) via the new API

> An alternative idea is to use a side channel instead of the main replication path to ship the snapshot. With this approach we don't shift the offset and it eventually opens a way to get rid of the offset translation layer.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Alternatively, we could use a side channel instead of the main replication path to ship the snapshot. With this approach we don't shift the offset and it eventually opens a way to get rid of the offset translation layer.
```

### Overview

> When a leader decides to compact the log at offset X it:
> 
>   1. makes a snapshot and sends it to a majority of nodes via new API
>   2. waits until it's safe to do compaction:
>     a. segment containing X is closed
>     b. tx front is passed the end of the segment
>   3. starts include the new offset X to the `append_entries_request`
>   4. performs the compaction

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a leader decides to compact the log at offset X, it:

  1. makes a snapshot and sends it to a majority of the nodes via the new API
  2. waits until it's safe to do compaction:
    a. the segment containing X is closed
    b. tx front is passed the end of the segment
  3. starts include the new offset X to the `append_entries_request`
  4. performs the compaction
```

> When a follower observes a compacted offset past its snapshot via `append_entries_request` it:
> 
>   1. queries all nodes and finds a node which has the snapshot (there is at least a majority of such nodes so availability stays the same as with Raft)
>   2. downloads the snapshot
>   3. applies the snapshot
>   4. rewinds the snapshot to the snapshot's offset
>   5. acknowledges the `append_entries_request`

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
When a follower observes a compacted offset past its snapshot via `append_entries_request`, it:

  1. queries all nodes to find a node that has the snapshot (this is a majority of the nodes, so the availability is the same as with Raft)
  2. downloads the snapshot
  3. applies the snapshot
  4. rewinds the snapshot to the snapshot's offset
  5. acknowledges the `append_entries_request`

```

> It's safe to serve read from a replica bounded by the last snapshot's offset or by current offset if the compacted offset is equal to the last snapshot.

Reviewer 2: is "serve read" a typo?

Author: yes, I think it should be `to serve read requests` .

## Interaction with other features

> The RFC doesn't cover SI code path but it seems that it should compatible with the changes, please comment if you see any concerns.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The RFC doesn't cover the Shadow Indexing code path, but it seems that it should compatible with the changes, please comment if you see any concerns.
```

> ## Telemetry & Observability

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Telemetry and observability
```

> We may monitor the size of the snapshot and the lag between the offset a follower saw and the consumable offset.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We can monitor the size of the snapshot and the lag between the offset that a follower saw and the consumable offset.
```

> ## Rationale and Alternatives
> 
> Shipping via the log gives us results faster and shipping via a new API takes more time to implement. However if we don't want to limit the horizon of read replicas by the last compaction time (last snapshot) we need to modify `append_entries_request` to include compacted offset and it is inline with shipping snapshots via the new API. So we may start with the fast solution and then morph it into the one which doesn't shift the offsets without reworking everything.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Rationale and alternatives

Shipping via the log gives us results faster, while shipping via a new API takes more time to implement. However, if we don't want to limit the horizon of read replicas by the last compaction time (the last snapshot), we need to modify `append_entries_request` to include the compacted offset, and it is inline with shipping snapshots via the new API. So we may start with the fast solution and then morph it into one which doesn't shift the offsets without reworking everything.
```

>   1. ship snapshot via the log
>   2. modify `append_entries_request`
>   3. ship log via the new API

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  1. Ship snapshot via the log
  2. Modify `append_entries_request`
  3. Ship the log via the new API
```

> With this plan we'll get actionable results at each step. The alternative to jump directly to step three.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
With this plan we'll get actionable results at each step. The alternative is to jump directly to step three.
```

## Unresolved questions

Should we do anything with respect to
- integration with SI

> - integration with WASM transform

Reviewer: I think all WASM would have to do is set it's maximum read offset to the newly proposed offset (min compacted offset).

> Should we do anything with respect to
> - integration with SI
> - integration with WASM transform

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Should we do anything with respect to:
- Integration with Shadow Indexing
- Integration with Wasm Data Transform
```

- Feature Name: Raft snapshots
- Status: draft
- Start Date: 2022-01-31
- Authors: Denis Rystsov
- Issue: TBD

# Executive Summary

Introduce Raft snapshots not bound to log truncation in order to solve compaction-related problems with idempotency, transactions, and offset translator, and pave the way to custom state machines.

## What is being proposed

Make the snapshot before the compaction and ship it to all (or the majority of) the nodes in a cluster so that each node sees the same aggregate of the log. Currently, when Redpanda does compaction, it introduces holes to the log and when a follower replays the log to build an aggregate, it ends up with different view.

# Motivation
## Why are we doing this?

To fix existing problems that prevent transactions from working with the compacted topics. To introduce infrastructure that supports custom (probably WASM based) state machines.

## What use cases does it support?

 - Idempotency
 - Transactions
 - Offset translator
 - Custom state machines

# Guide-level explanation
## Context

> Some of the Redpanda operations require knowledge about all of the records that are passed through the partition (Raft log) up to the current moment (let's call them aggregate-dependent).

Reviewer 3: Thinking out loud to help my understanding here: Naming is hard. Nit: maybe "aggregation-dependent" since it is the process (aggregation) and not the result (aggregate) that these operations depend on. I'm thinking of this concept as "non-trivially compactable".
If we name Kafka's idea of compaction "trivial key-based compaction", we are just noting that this is not the same as STM or transaction snapshotting in general; the snapshot needs to reflect the result of the applied operations. Simply eliding older operations with the same key is not sufficient for the more general case of STMs/transactions/operations.

Local caching isn't enough. Raft tolerates node failures as long as the majority are connected. This means a single node may fall behind the majority and behind the compaction horizon.

![](./imgs/20220131_behind.png)

When the isolated node rejoins the cluster it fetches an already-compacted log with holes, and the state diverges.

# Reference-level explanation

## Approach #1: Ship the snapshot (cached state) via the log

The main idea is to use existing log replication to ship the snapshot. It's easier to implement, but just like the reconfiguration batches, it shifts the offsets and requires that we continue to rely on offset translation.

### Overview

When a leader decides to do compaction at offset X, it:
 
  1. saves the current snapshot
  2. waits until it's safe to do compaction:
    a. segment containing X is closed
    b. tx front is passed the end of the segment
  3. replicates the snapshot
 
When a leader or a follower sees the snapshot via `state_machine::apply` (this only happens when the batch is replicated to the majority and can't be lost), it:

  - performs the compaction when the current node is the leader and it sent the snapshot (within the current term)

>   - when the snapshot isn't applied:

Reviewer 3: I don't quite understand.  Maybe this line shouldn't be indented under "when a leader of follower sees the snapshot via apply"?
 Can you elaborate on this scenario? Is the snapshot not applied because leadership changed?

    - performs the compaction

There is a problem with this approach: a follower doesn't know if the batches it replays contain holes, so its current state may be incorrect until it sees the snapshot batch. This becomes a problem when Redpanda supports reads from replicas. There are several ways to handle this: 

#### Block replica reads

A follower is allowed to serve reads only up to the last observed snapshot. Even when the prior batches contain holes, they become visible when the snapshot is applied and corrected.

#### Modify the `append_entries_request`

We can modify the `append_enties_request` to include an offset of the last compaction. When a follower sees that last compaction is less than the current offset, it knows that the latest batches don't have holes and it's safe to serve the requests.

When we modify `append_entries_request` or when we introduce and switch to the new API, we need to take upgrades into account. In order to avoid shutting down a cluster for an update, we need to put the change behind a feature flag, update the brokers one by one, and only then active the feature.

## Approach #2: Ship the snapshot (cached state) via the new API

> Alternatively, we could use a side channel instead of the main replication path to ship the snapshot. With this approach we don't shift the offset and it eventually opens a way to get rid of the offset translation layer.

Reviewer 4: Can we add here some details about conflict resolution in case snapshot on the follower and leader do not agree. Also how we would prevent a node with stale snapshot from being elected as a leader

Author: I don't think that the conflict are possible here: if we do snapshots only for the committed offsets then the snapshot for the same offsets should be the same.

**How would we prevent a node with stale snapshot from being elected as a leader?**

We just don't. If the new leader has seen a record replicated after the snapshot it means it already fetched a snapshot and if it hasn't then it can't be elected as a leader

Author: I see I haven't mentioned that we should wait for the committed index to make the snapshot, good catch!

### Overview

When a leader decides to compact the log at offset X, it:

  1. makes a snapshot and sends it to a majority of the nodes via the new API
  2. waits until it's safe to do compaction:
    a. the segment containing X is closed
    b. tx front is passed the end of the segment
  3. starts include the new offset X to the `append_entries_request`
  4. performs the compaction
 
When a follower observes a compacted offset past its snapshot via `append_entries_request`, it:

>   1. queries all nodes to find a node that has the snapshot (this is a majority of the nodes, so the availability is the same as with Raft)

Reviewer 5: An idea: can we repurpose `InstallSnapshot` rpc to do this? Something like:
* the follower detects (based on arrived `append_entries_request`) if log entries needed to advance particular state machines have already been deleted/compacted on the leader. If this is the case, it includes a request for corresponding snapshots in the `append_entries_reply`.
* the leader then sends an InstallSnapshot request with needed snapshots.

  2. downloads the snapshot
  3. applies the snapshot
  4. rewinds the snapshot to the snapshot's offset
  5. acknowledges the `append_entries_request`

It's safe to serve read from a replica bounded by the last snapshot's offset or by current offset if the compacted offset is equal to the last snapshot.

## Interaction with other features

> The RFC doesn't cover the Shadow Indexing code path, but it seems that it should compatible with the changes, please comment if you see any concerns.

Reviewer 5: One concern I have is that the archival metadata snapshot can already grow pretty big, so replicating it via the log as-is can cause problems.
